---
title: All About Keuffel & Esser Rules
description: A comprehensive history of Keuffel & Esser slide rules, organized by chapter, along with a portfolio of the models in the collection.
order: 4
draft: false
---

*Author's note: This, and most articles I write, are living documents. This article (or book) about K&E represents my research and understanding at the time of writing. It take a more narrative, story-driven approach to the topic. There are no targets with this writing, no thesis; no other purpose except to work my way through my own process of learning. The text will grow, change, and evolve slowly until, some day, a reader finds value in it. If that is you, and if that is today, thanks for taking the time to read it. Please forgive some of the "under construction" aspects of this writing, as things like annotations, the appendices and descriptions of items in the latter chapters might be incomplete or not fully documented. That will change the closer to "completeness" it gets. This article was last updated April 18, 2026. Many changes are being made to reflect a 1968 K&E Catalog Price List that was stumbled upon!*

## Introduction

If you are a lover of slide rules, or merely a connoisseur of trinkets, then it would be difficult to find something more collectible than slide rules made by Keuffel and Esser. Not only is this because of the enormous variety of rules to be found in circulation today, but because of the vast number of model types and styles of rules manufactured by K&E over the 100 plus years of its existence. Speaking as a slide rule collector myself who, like most, began the hobby not as a respecter of anything particular, swallowing up any rules we can get our hands on, it's not until we begin to accumulate a few K&E rules that we realize that we could spend most of our lives acquiring, researching, cataloging, and writing ONLY about K&E. The history is that extensive. I have found myself charmed by their rules; enthralled with understanding K&E product evolution and design decisions; curious as to the nature of their consumer demographics and preferences; and wondering about K&E marketing, company leadership, and the business successes and failures surrounding these slide rules.

For those who live in the United States, count yourself fortunate that K&E slide rules, among other collectible K&E products, are easily and quickly found. For the most part, particular K&E models dominated sales for them. Such models, like the 4081 Log Log Deci-Trig and the 4053 Polyphase Mannheim are in no way rare, nor particularly valuable. But because each of those models have existed for 70 years or more, and because K&E always felt that their rules could be improved, a collector like me might end up with 20 to 30 of EACH of these models, realizing that no two of them will be exactly the same. And because of this, the evolution of changes can be mapped in a way that would please Charles Darwin. I am thankful that K&E was never satisfied with the status quo, because I can collect an enormous number of meaningful slide rules without needing to pay exorbitant prices for them. That said, I could do that if I wanted as well!

Historically, there are rare slide rules of substantial value. Such can be the result of either extremely limited production or historical significance. And when these slide rules are unearthed, there is a large group of dedicated K&E collectors who want to acquire them, not only the rules themselves, but the story they tell. And I believe it's a exciting time to become a K&E devotee, as we are now two or three generations removed from people who actually know what slide rules are. There is the opportunity for even ultra-rare K&E slide rules to come out of hiding, as family heirlooms turn into dispensable curiosities of "what is this thing and why do we still have it?"

So unlike any other makers, including Pickett, Hemmi, Faber-Castell, and Aristo, Keuffel and Esser - both the slide rules and the company - sparks curiosity in me. So much so that what follows here will be a written love-affair of not only the slide rules in my collection, but information and understanding about every other slide-rule-related fact to be unearthed about K&E.

<div class="callout-box" data-color="teal">

## Sidebar: The Problems with K&E Rules

In my own exposure to the vast array of K&E slide rules, I've noticed some problems that pop up consistently throughout my inventory of rules. While these aspects don't detract from the overall wonderful collectability of their products, there are some annoyances you need to be aware of when you seek to collect them yourselves.

The most common problem is the "K&E Rotting Cursor Syndrome," known as "KERCS." (You know it's a problem if there's an acronym for it.) Many rules made prior to ~1950 had celluloid cursor rails that didn't hold up well over time and would eventually crumble to pieces. This begins with the outgassing of the nitric acid from the celluloid, which rusts the cursor spring and compromises the spring's anchor going through the rail. Eventually, the spring breaks away and the celluloid rails become brittle as the camphor plasticizer is also forced out of the celluloid.* Thus, if you are looking at K&E slide rules on eBay, inspect the pictures carefully as a majority of the older rules will have cracked or crumbling cursors. Once compromised, any disassembly of the cursor for cleaning runs the high risk of watching the cursor rails crumble into your hands. If cracks in the rails are not obvious in the pictures, then note any rust stains either at the cursor or along the slide rule rail itself. If this is noted, avoid purchasing the rule. K&E seemed to rectify this condition after 1950 with a more durable plastic that also held up better against the typical yellowing of old plastics.

Less known about K&E wooden rules, especially when compared with the Japanese bamboo-constructed rules, is that while mahogany is a generally stable wood (often used in the making of guitar necks), it isn't as stable as bamboo. Some of the rules in my collection show slight signs of cupping across the face of the slide and stator (base) rails, the result of changes in humidity over the life-time of the rule. I've noticed that it can affect the appearance of a rule, as well as its functionality if the cursor becomes too tight to the rails due to the swelling. This is especially true with all-glass cursors from 1916 to around 1930, whose cursor rails thickness to the body has a very small tolerance. In such cases, I've had cursor glass break just because the glass is too tight to the rule when using it, all because of the slight swelling of the mahogany and/or a loosening of the celluloid over time. If this is noticed, it is beneficial to shim between the cursor rails and the glass.

In a similar way, because the slide is designed to glide into the stator rails with a tongue and groove design, the mahogany of the slide's tongue is prone to chipping off at the ends, and in many cases breaking off along the wood grain much further down the slide than many would like. So, an inspection of the slide before purchase is a good idea. That said, with a donor slide rule of matching mahogany wood, you can typically repair broken slides with some wood glue or super glue.

Many of the single-sided Mannheim types have a stator rail screwed onto and through the rules backing. This is not a problem in general, but because the backing is thin, overtightening these screws can wear out the countersunk shoulder in which the screw rests, eventually widening and no longer holding the rail firm to the backing plate. This can be revealed often times in pictures when there's larger gaps than you'd expect when the slide is in place. And because the celluloid plastic is bonded to the wood with glue, separation can occur over time. While this is often repairable with some super glue and a clamp, neglecting the separation can lead to broken-off sections of the plastic on many samples. The quality of the adhesives did improve overtime, so older rules are more susceptible to delamination, which is why companies like Nestler and AW Faber actually used screws to reinforce the celluloid laminations of earlier slide rules.

Finally, the smaller, single-sided plastic rules of the 4150-1 and Doric types of pocket rules are a little too flimsy in my evaluation. The plastic backing has easily cracked in my own hands when cleaning them, or can peel away from the stator rails. Again, a little super glue can fix this, but I find the overall quality in those rules disappointing. In a similar way, the older Ever-There 4097 and 4098 rules made of "Xylonite" are very brittle now, the toll of 70 to 80 plus years of existence, many of which having warped or curled over those years. I snapped a slide in two when trying to dislodge a stuck and warped sample myself, so condition is crucial when considering a purchase. Likewise, these rules have yellowed much more than any other K&E slide rule you will find. In most cases, the aged yellowing of celluloid can actually be cleaned or sanded away from the surface of the rule without affecting any of the engine-divided scales/fonts. But I've been unable to make much progress with restoring the Xylonite in a few of my own Ever-There slide rules.

Having those concerns mentioned, the great thing about many of the K&E rules is that they can be brought back to life, remarkably so, with a few repairing skills. You need a completely intact rule (especially the cursor), but cosmetic issues can be corrected indeed. I've taken a 20" 68-1200 (4081 type) duplex rule that was covered in severe rust-colored stains, and then I used sandpaper, razor blades, and Scotch-Brite pads to bring the celluloid back to it's old glory without affecting the scales themselves...or at least not in a way that hasn't been worth the effort of restoration. As such, I've bought some pretty cheap, cosmetically-damaged K&E slide rules and turned them back into a display-worthy sample. Likewise, with use of a cheap donor slide rule, a 3D printer, or via metal fabrication, you can replace missing components, especially cursor rails, on an otherwise pristine slide rule.

*Note: There is some debate about what causes the rusting of the spring in these cursors. While camphor does sublimate out from old celluloid eventually, it is a well-known rust inhibitor, and as such would not be the cause of a compromised cursor spring. Of note though is that the camphor is the plasticizer of the nitrocellulose structure, and as such the leaching of camphor would certainly make for brittle celluloid. Some feel that "celluloid rot" can cause other rot in other pieces of celluloid, but I find this untrue in observation...the rule itself, also covered in celluloid, never seems to suffer from the breakdown of the cursor rails beyond some rust marks from the cursor spring. A second opinion regarding KERCs comes from the Autumn 2011 issue of the Slide Rule Gazette, where the author, through personal correspondence with K&E expert collector Clark McCoy, says that McCoy feels that the rotting cursors appear on rule made between 1940 and 1945, which involved only rules made between serial numbers 750,XXX (in 1940) and the first "roll-over" back to 000,XXX (in 1945). This can be seen in McCoy's Serial Numbers chart in Chapter 1. McCoy posits that K&E changed the recipe of the celluloid at the government's request to preserve nitrates needed in the production of explosives. (John Hunt Sr., Slide Rule Gazette, Issue 12, Autumn 2011, p. 37.)

</div>

## Table of Contents

- [Chapter 1: Understandings and Conventions](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-1-understandings-and-conventions/)
- [Chapter 2: Rules of the Single-Sided, Mannheim-Type](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-2-single-sided-mannheim-type/)
- [Chapter 3: Rules of the Double-Sided, Duplex-Type](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-3-double-sided-duplex-type/)
- [Chapter 4: The Specialty Rules](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-4-specialty-rules/)
- [Chapter 5: Miscellaneous K&E Rules](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-5-miscellaneous-rules/)
- [Chapter 6: Out of Catalog, Custom Rules](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-6-out-of-catalog-custom-rules/)
- [Chapter 7: My Portfolio of K&E Slide Rules](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/chapter-7-portfolio/)
- [Appendix 1: A Study of K&E Cases](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/appendix-1-study-of-cases/)
- [Appendix 2: A Study of K&E Product Catalogs](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/appendix-2-study-of-product-catalogs/)
- [Appendix 3: A K&E Cursor Study](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/appendix-3-cursor-study/)
- [Appendix 4: Bibliography](/sliderules/all-about-ke-rules/appendix-4-bibliography/)
